---
published: true
layout: ideasletter
date: 2017-04-17T21:35:51.000Z
vol: 'Nov 2015 - Vol 6, Issue 8'
categories: ideasletter
img: /images/ideasletter/default.png
introduction: >-
  <p>We are back in Canada enjoying the fall colors after an amazing time
  travelling and doing many workshops with wonderfully engaged and appreciative
  participants. We are happy to report that contemporary ideas of dynamic
  leadership and followership are being embraced all over the globe with all
  different types of organizations - from schools in South Africa to European
  banks. Organizations want more collaboration and fuller engagement. People
  want more influence and to make a difference.</p><p>This month's ideasletter
  examines the leadership/followership dynamic in collaborative decision making.
  How are you showing up in both your roles?</p><p>Generatively, </p><p>Samantha
  & Marc</p><br><p><i>Leadership Is Half The Story</i> available now in
  bookstores and online bookstores all over.</p>
---
## Level 3 Decision Support

My father-in-law, Harry, is a brilliant, funny, philosophy-blogging, 7,000-steps-a-day, nonagenarian who is legendary in the family for many wonderful reasons. But he’s also is legendary for his behavior in shoe stores. 

The legend holds that shoe salespeople literally run away from Harry now when they see him coming, and that family members in the know refuse to accompany him. Apparently shoe-shopping is THE ultimate taxing experience for Harry is nearly impossible to satisfy and typically walks out after many hours with only one pair of shoes … the ones he wore in. 

Of course I’d heard tell of this family legend. But I also hate to shy aware from a challenge. So when Harry threw down the gauntlet and selected me to go on the quest for the illusive shoe purchase, I couldn’t say no. In fact, I was co-creating this course at the time and had been researching, teaching and coaching on decision making and providing decision support. I better be up to this task!” Let the shoe shopping begin!
    
Before we went to any stores, I asked him what were his decision criteria? He told me that cost is very important. Next, I asked him what else was important to him? He said that the shoes had to be comfortable, because his feet hurt sometimes, and that the shoes had to be stable because, at the age of 93, he’s concerned about falling. I asked him if there was anything else that was important? Yes, he said, I also need them to be easy to put on and take off, especially using a shoe horn, AND they had to be adaptable to many different situations – from walking in a park to attending the opera. So off we went to the stores armed with 5 decision criteria with a shoe-horn at the ready.

On the drive, I asked him to rank the 5 requirements. After much resistance and equal push back on my part - “No they can’t be equal, you must choose.” “No, price can’t possibly be the most important.  Your comfort and health are far more important.” The final rank order was #1 Comfort, #2 Stability, #3 Ease, # 4 Adaptability and a distant #5 Cost. 

At the store, we lined up all the options. I insisted he walk the whole perimeter of the store to test each pair then put them into a MAYBE pile or a NO pile. (That way he got his steps in on his FITBIT too!) That process narrowed the choices to 4 pairs. Each of those were tried again then evaluated against the decision criteria. After thorough analysis, we had a winner. We left triumphantly with new shoes snuggled on his feet, and I got a job offer to work in the store☺

That’s level 3 decision support: Helping the decision maker – my father-in-law Harry – make the best possible decision. It’s also incredibly useful to cookie–crumb your reasoning when you are supporting someone else’s decision by sharing the steps that led you to put forward certain information, a particular response or idea or option or solution. Consider Spock who is a true “thinking partner” in his followership role: he does much more than give an opinion, he explains his rationale and how to interpret the evidence. Research shows that the use of reasoning is also perceived as a powerful indication of people’s promotability in their workplace. Those are skills that really get noticed and appreciated. 

You see normally a shoe salesperson provides Level one or Level two support. Level one is an opinion: oh, those shoes look good on you! And Level two is providing information: yes, these shoes are in the price range you asked for. But Level three is both about collecting data as well as helping organize it meaningful ways. That’s what I did by helping Harry understand his preferences, rank them, and use them to purchase shoes. It’s what all great salespeople do, and daughter-in-laws, too.
